P3117_extending_conditionally_borrowed.md, before:

---
title: "Extending Conditionally Borrowed"
document: D3117R1
date: 2024-02-05
audience:
  - SG-9
  - LEWG
author:
  - name: Zach Laine
    email: <whatwasthataddress@gmail.com>
  - name: Barry Revzin
    email: <barry.revzin@gmail.com>
toc: true
monofont: "DejaVu Sans Mono"

---

# Changelog

## Changes since R0

- Remove changes for all views except `transform_view`.
- Completely change the strategy of the changes for maximum ABI compatibility.

# Motivation

In [@P2017R1], we made some range adaptors conditionally borrowed.  But we
didn't touch adaptors that had callables - like `views::transform`.  It turns
out to be very useful to have a borrowable version of `views::transform`.
Indeed,
[P2728R6](https://www.open-std.org/jtc1/sc22/wg21/docs/papers/2023/p2728r6.html)
even adds a dedicated new range adaptor (`views::project`) which is simply a
version of `views::transform` that can be borrowed (because its callable must
be a constant).

But rather than add a dedicated view for this specific case, which requires a
new name but really only helps `views::transform`, we can generalize
`views::transform` to address the use-case in a way that would also help all
the other range adaptors that take callables.  At the very least, in
`views::transform(r, f)` if `r` is borrowed and `f` is empty, an
implementation can simply put `f` in the `transform_view<R, F>::iterator`
directly (rather than a `transform_view<R, F> *`) which would allow it to be
borrowed.  The same could be said for other range adaptors that take callables
as well, which seems like a more useful approach as well as not requiring new
names for every adaptor.

The main question then is what the criteria should be for when
`transform_view<R, F>` should be a borrowed range (when `R` is):

- `is_empty_v<F>` (range-v3 already does this - not for conditionally borrowed,
  but just to decide whether to store the callable by value in the iterator)

- `sizeof(F) <= sizeof(void *)` and `is_trivially_copyable_v<F>` (this means
  that when transforming with a function pointer, the function pointer itself
  can live in the iterator - which takes the same amount of space as the
  parent pointer, except with one less indirection)

- something else?

This question is a little simpler for `views::transform` (which only needs to
potentially store `f` in the adapted iterator) than it is for `views::filter`
(which would need not only the predicate but also the underlying sentinel, so
this may not be worthwhile).  This would need to be carefully considered.

# Why care about `borrowed_range`?

`borrowed_range` is important because it allows the standard range adaptors
and views to know that a particular view is a proper view -- that is, a
reference type, not an expensive-to-copy type like a `std::vector<int>`.
Certain views refuse to work with non-`borrowed_range` ranges, because the
result might dangle.  For instance, you cannot construct a `subrange` from a
non-`borrowed_range`.  In other cases, an rvalue range might be wrapped in a
`owning_view` to turn it into a view, if it was not already a
`borrowed_range`.  So `std::vector<int>({1,2,3,4,5,6,7,8,9}) | take(3)` would
take the rvalue `vector`, wrap it in an `owning_view`, and the result is a
non-`borrowed_range` that is move-only.

Here is the part of [range.range]{.sref} that describes `borrowed_range`:

> ```c++
> template<class T>
>   concept borrowed_range =
>     range<T> && (is_lvalue_reference_v<T> || enable_borrowed_range<remove_cvref_t<T>>);
> ```
> [4]{.pnum} Let `U` be `remove_reference_t<T>` if `T` is an rvalue reference type, and `T`
> otherwise. Given a variable `u` of type `U`, `T` models `borrowed_range` only
> if the validity of iterators obtained from `u` is not tied to the lifetime of
> that variable.
> 
> [5]{.pnum} [_Note 2:_ Since the validity of iterators is not tied to the lifetime of a
> variable whose type models borrowed_range, a function with a parameter of such
> a type can return iterators obtained from it without danger of dangling. _? end
> note_]

To increase the interoperability of the templates in `std::ranges` and to
avoid unnecessary wrapping, we should make as many views `borrowed_range`s as
is reasonable.  It is probably unreasonable to do so if there is a significant
cost involved.  To make a view a `borrowed_range` means copying its state out
of the view itself, and into the iterator instead.

Note that copying state to the iterator is not sufficient to guarantee
borrowed-ness, though is it necessary.  Most views take an existing view `V`
and do something with it, making a new view over the existing one.  For
instance, `transform_view<V, F>` creates a view by transforming the elements
of `V` using the invocable `F`.

A particular view specialization is only borrowed if it satisfies the
`borrowed_range` concept, *and* `V` does as well.  This is important, because
if a view is not borrowed, no view that uses it will be either.  In `rng | V1
| V2 | ... | Vn`, if *any* `Vi` is not borrowed, the entire resulting view is not.

# Status quo

Currently, there are several views that are never `borrowed_range`s that
potentially could be.  They are: `transform_view`, `zip_transform_view`,
`adjacent_transform_view`, `filter_view`, `take_while_view`, `chunk_by_view`,
`join_view`, `join_with_view`, `split_view`, `lazy_split_view`, and
`cartesian_product_view`.

A previous version of this paper attempted to address the borrowability of
several of those views.  The consensus in SG-9 was that, since this would be a
n ABI break for all of these views, that approach was too ambitious.  This
version of the paper radically scales that effort back; the plan now is to
make a minimal change to `transform_view`.  If that change can gain consensus
in SG-9, we can proceed with more views, if possible.

# Proposed change

All these changes are in `std::ranges`.

## Create implementation-only trait

```c++
template<class F>
  constexpr bool @*tidy-func*@ = is_empty_v<F> && is_trivially_constructible_v<F>;
```

`@*tidy-func*@` evaluates to `true` when an invocable is a candidate for being
re-created on the fly in a view's iterators.

## `transform_view`

Change `transform_view::iterator` to create a new object of the type of
`transform_view`'s `F` template parameter.  That is, the iterator will not
reach back through the `parent_` data member to get the `fun_` member out of
the view.  Also, add this specialization:

```c++
template<class T, class F>
  constexpr bool enable_borrowed_range<transform_view<T>> =
    enable_borrowed_range<T> && @*tidy-func*@<F>;
```

This simple change means that, for any `transform_view` `tv` for which
`enable_borrowed_range` is `true`, it is safe to use `tv.begin()`/`tv.end()`
after the lifetime of `tv`.  Even though `tv.begin()` contains a dangling
pointer to `tv`, it will never dereference that pointer.

### ABI concerns

This still poses an ABI problem, though it is much less likely to affect real
code than the change in the R0 revision of this paper.  The layout and even
the values of data members is unchanged in `transform_view`,
`transform_view::iterator`, and `transform_view::sentinel`.  So, passing
`transform_view`s and even their iterator/sentinel pairs across an ABI
boundary should be safe in almost all cases -- whichever side of the ABI
boundary is using the objects should use them in the right way.  There is no
ODR issue with this change.

However, it is possible to construct a memory-unsafe usage across an ABI
boundary.  New code, seeing that `is_borrowed_range<transform_view<...>>` is
`true`, might get rid of the view, because it can.  Then old code might try to
use the dangling `parent_` pointer:

```c++
// old_tu.cpp
// Code built with C++20 semantics.  Separately compiled, but with the types
// and function declarations available in a header.

auto transform_foos(std::vector<int> const & vec)
    -> decltype(vec | std::views::transform(some_f));

using transformed_foos_t =
    decltype(transform_foos(std::declval<std::vector<int> const &>()));

void print_transformed_range(transformed_foos_t::iterator f, transformed_foos_t::sentinel l) {
    for (auto it = f; it != l; ++it) {
        std::cout << *it << "\n";
    }
}
```

```c++
// new_tu.cpp
// Code built with post-P3117 semantics.

void new_using_func() {
    auto r = std::ranges::subrange(transform_foos(get_vec()));  // leaves parent_ to dangle
    // Uses F{} to get the predicate in the iterator.  OK.
    for (auto i: r) {
        std::cout << i << "\n";
    }

    // Runs in old_tu.cpp. Tries to use parent_->pred_, but parent_ is
    // dangling.  UB.
    print_transformed_range(r.begin(), r.end());
}
```

There are a number of unlikely conditions that must exist for the user to
write this unsafe code.

  1. It is difficult to name the types of `std` views and their iterators.  As
     you can see above, we had to make a separate function that creates the
     `transform_view` to make it easier to get a typename for it.

  2. The user must pass an iterator/sentinel pair to the old TU (as above), or
     possibly put the iterator/sentinel pair into a `subrange`.  Passing the
     entire `transform_view` to a function means that it will outlive its
     iterators.  Passing a `subrange` is possible, but unlikely -- it you
     wanted to pass the iterator/sentinel pair as a range, you would probably
     just pass the `transform_view`.

  3. The potential danger of this case is limited to the
     `is_borrowed_range<Expr> == true` case, which is affected by the
     borrowability of all ranges and views in the view expression `Expr`.  In
     other words, the proposed changes to `transform_view` will make it
     borrowable, but the danger above is only present if `transform_view` is
     actually used in a fully-borrowed view expression.

This kind of failure is the bad kind -- it is memory unsafe, and leaves no
lexical trace of its unsafety.  However, it is also exceedingly unlikely that
the user will find themself in this situation.

# Implementation experience

One of the authors implemented the changes suggested above.  The
implementation was done by taking the libstdc++ implementations, copying them
into a new header, in a new new namespace under `std::ranges`, and altering
them.  The implementation can be found
[here](https://github.com/tzlaine/small_wg1_papers/tree/master/conditionally_borrowed).
The header is accompanied by a test file, and a small perf test.  The
implementation was very straightforward.

# Costs versus benefits

TODO: No real change expected; run the perf tests to be sure.

Commit message:

In extending borrowable, is_trivially_constructible_v<F> -> is_trivially_default_constructible_v<F> && is_trivially_destructible_v<F>; add Jonathan Müller as an author.

P3117_extending_conditionally_borrowed.md, after:

---
title: "Extending Conditionally Borrowed"
document: D3117R1
date: today
audience:
  - SG-9
  - LEWG
author:
  - name: Zach Laine
    email: <whatwasthataddress@gmail.com>
  - name: Jonathan Müller
    email: <jonathanmueller.dev@gmail.com>
  - name: Barry Revzin
    email: <barry.revzin@gmail.com>
toc: true
monofont: "DejaVu Sans Mono"

---

# Changelog

## Changes since R0

- Remove changes for all views except `transform_view`.
- Completely change the strategy of the changes for maximum ABI compatibility.

# Motivation

In [@P2017R1], we made some range adaptors conditionally borrowed.  But we
didn't touch adaptors that had callables - like `views::transform`.  It turns
out to be very useful to have a borrowable version of `views::transform`.
Indeed,
[P2728R6](https://www.open-std.org/jtc1/sc22/wg21/docs/papers/2023/p2728r6.html)
even adds a dedicated new range adaptor (`views::project`) which is simply a
version of `views::transform` that can be borrowed (because its callable must
be a constant).

But rather than add a dedicated view for this specific case, which requires a
new name but really only helps `views::transform`, we can generalize
`views::transform` to address the use-case in a way that would also help all
the other range adaptors that take callables.  At the very least, in
`views::transform(r, f)` if `r` is borrowed and `f` is empty, an
implementation can simply put `f` in the `transform_view<R, F>::iterator`
directly (rather than a `transform_view<R, F> *`) which would allow it to be
borrowed.  The same could be said for other range adaptors that take callables
as well, which seems like a more useful approach as well as not requiring new
names for every adaptor.

The main question then is what the criteria should be for when
`transform_view<R, F>` should be a borrowed range (when `R` is):

- `is_empty_v<F>` (range-v3 already does this - not for conditionally borrowed,
  but just to decide whether to store the callable by value in the iterator)

- `sizeof(F) <= sizeof(void *)` and `is_trivially_copyable_v<F>` (this means
  that when transforming with a function pointer, the function pointer itself
  can live in the iterator - which takes the same amount of space as the
  parent pointer, except with one less indirection)

- something else?

This question is a little simpler for `views::transform` (which only needs to
potentially store `f` in the adapted iterator) than it is for `views::filter`
(which would need not only the predicate but also the underlying sentinel, so
this may not be worthwhile).  This would need to be carefully considered.

# Why care about `borrowed_range`?

`borrowed_range` is important because it allows the standard range adaptors
and views to know that a particular view is a proper view -- that is, a
reference type, not an expensive-to-copy type like a `std::vector<int>`.
Certain views refuse to work with non-`borrowed_range` ranges, because the
result might dangle.  For instance, you cannot construct a `subrange` from a
non-`borrowed_range`.  In other cases, an rvalue range might be wrapped in a
`owning_view` to turn it into a view, if it was not already a
`borrowed_range`.  So `std::vector<int>({1,2,3,4,5,6,7,8,9}) | take(3)` would
take the rvalue `vector`, wrap it in an `owning_view`, and the result is a
non-`borrowed_range` that is move-only.

Here is the part of [range.range]{.sref} that describes `borrowed_range`:

> ```c++
> template<class T>
>   concept borrowed_range =
>     range<T> && (is_lvalue_reference_v<T> || enable_borrowed_range<remove_cvref_t<T>>);
> ```
> [4]{.pnum} Let `U` be `remove_reference_t<T>` if `T` is an rvalue reference type, and `T`
> otherwise. Given a variable `u` of type `U`, `T` models `borrowed_range` only
> if the validity of iterators obtained from `u` is not tied to the lifetime of
> that variable.
> 
> [5]{.pnum} [_Note 2:_ Since the validity of iterators is not tied to the lifetime of a
> variable whose type models borrowed_range, a function with a parameter of such
> a type can return iterators obtained from it without danger of dangling. _? end
> note_]

To increase the interoperability of the templates in `std::ranges` and to
avoid unnecessary wrapping, we should make as many views `borrowed_range`s as
is reasonable.  It is probably unreasonable to do so if there is a significant
cost involved.  To make a view a `borrowed_range` means copying its state out
of the view itself, and into the iterator instead.

Note that copying state to the iterator is not sufficient to guarantee
borrowed-ness, though is it necessary.  Most views take an existing view `V`
and do something with it, making a new view over the existing one.  For
instance, `transform_view<V, F>` creates a view by transforming the elements
of `V` using the invocable `F`.

A particular view specialization is only borrowed if it satisfies the
`borrowed_range` concept, *and* `V` does as well.  This is important, because
if a view is not borrowed, no view that uses it will be either.  In `rng | V1
| V2 | ... | Vn`, if *any* `Vi` is not borrowed, the entire resulting view is not.

# Status quo

Currently, there are several views that are never `borrowed_range`s that
potentially could be.  They are: `transform_view`, `zip_transform_view`,
`adjacent_transform_view`, `filter_view`, `take_while_view`, `chunk_by_view`,
`join_view`, `join_with_view`, `split_view`, `lazy_split_view`, and
`cartesian_product_view`.

A previous version of this paper attempted to address the borrowability of
several of those views.  The consensus in SG-9 was that, since this would be a
n ABI break for all of these views, that approach was too ambitious.  This
version of the paper radically scales that effort back; the plan now is to
make a minimal change to `transform_view`.  If that change can gain consensus
in SG-9, we can proceed with more views, if possible.

# Proposed change

All these changes are in `std::ranges`.

## Create implementation-only trait

```c++
template<class F>
  constexpr bool @*tidy-func*@ =
    is_empty_v<F> && is_trivially_default_constructible_v<F> && is_trivially_destructible_v<F>;
```

`@*tidy-func*@` evaluates to `true` when an invocable is a candidate for being
re-created on the fly in a view's iterators.

## `transform_view`

Change `transform_view::iterator` to create a new object of the type of
`transform_view`'s `F` template parameter.  That is, the iterator will not
reach back through the `parent_` data member to get the `fun_` member out of
the view.  Also, add this specialization:

```c++
template<class T, class F>
  constexpr bool enable_borrowed_range<transform_view<T>> =
    enable_borrowed_range<T> && @*tidy-func*@<F>;
```

This simple change means that, for any `transform_view` `tv` for which
`enable_borrowed_range` is `true`, it is safe to use `tv.begin()`/`tv.end()`
after the lifetime of `tv`.  Even though `tv.begin()` contains a dangling
pointer to `tv`, it will never dereference that pointer.

### ABI concerns

This still poses an ABI problem, though it is much less likely to affect real
code than the change in the R0 revision of this paper.  The layout and even
the values of data members is unchanged in `transform_view`,
`transform_view::iterator`, and `transform_view::sentinel`.  So, passing
`transform_view`s and even their iterator/sentinel pairs across an ABI
boundary should be safe in almost all cases -- whichever side of the ABI
boundary is using the objects should use them in the right way.  There is no
ODR issue with this change.

However, it is possible to construct a memory-unsafe usage across an ABI
boundary.  New code, seeing that `is_borrowed_range<transform_view<...>>` is
`true`, might get rid of the view, because it can.  Then old code might try to
use the dangling `parent_` pointer:

```c++
// old_tu.cpp
// Code built with C++20 semantics.  Separately compiled, but with the types
// and function declarations available in a header.

auto transform_foos(std::vector<int> const & vec)
    -> decltype(vec | std::views::transform(some_f));

using transformed_foos_t =
    decltype(transform_foos(std::declval<std::vector<int> const &>()));

void print_transformed_range(transformed_foos_t::iterator f, transformed_foos_t::sentinel l) {
    for (auto it = f; it != l; ++it) {
        std::cout << *it << "\n";
    }
}
```

```c++
// new_tu.cpp
// Code built with post-P3117 semantics.

void new_using_func() {
    auto r = std::ranges::subrange(transform_foos(get_vec()));  // leaves parent_ to dangle
    // Uses F{} to get the predicate in the iterator.  OK.
    for (auto i: r) {
        std::cout << i << "\n";
    }

    // Runs in old_tu.cpp. Tries to use parent_->pred_, but parent_ is
    // dangling.  UB.
    print_transformed_range(r.begin(), r.end());
}
```

There are a number of unlikely conditions that must exist for the user to
write this unsafe code.

  1. It is difficult to name the types of `std` views and their iterators.  As
     you can see above, we had to make a separate function that creates the
     `transform_view` to make it easier to get a typename for it.

  2. The user must pass an iterator/sentinel pair to the old TU (as above), or
     possibly put the iterator/sentinel pair into a `subrange`.  Passing the
     entire `transform_view` to a function means that it will outlive its
     iterators.  Passing a `subrange` is possible, but unlikely -- it you
     wanted to pass the iterator/sentinel pair as a range, you would probably
     just pass the `transform_view`.

  3. The potential danger of this case is limited to the
     `is_borrowed_range<Expr> == true` case, which is affected by the
     borrowability of all ranges and views in the view expression `Expr`.  In
     other words, the proposed changes to `transform_view` will make it
     borrowable, but the danger above is only present if `transform_view` is
     actually used in a fully-borrowed view expression.

This kind of failure is the bad kind -- it is memory unsafe, and leaves no
lexical trace of its unsafety.  However, it is also exceedingly unlikely that
the user will find themself in this situation.

# Implementation experience

One of the authors implemented the changes suggested above.  The
implementation was done by taking the libstdc++ implementations, copying them
into a new header, in a new new namespace under `std::ranges`, and altering
them.  The implementation can be found
[here](https://github.com/tzlaine/small_wg1_papers/tree/master/conditionally_borrowed).
The header is accompanied by a test file, and a small perf test.  The
implementation was very straightforward.

# Costs versus benefits

TODO: No real change expected; run the perf tests to be sure.
